Changelog
=========

1.0.0b101 25-06-2025
--------------------

We have tried to identify and label areas where APIs have been broken,
however due to the volume of change, some unexpected functionality may break.
Please proceed with utmost caution.

We believe that for the majority of cases that this update should bring an
enormous performance benefit.

## Breaking / major behavior changes

### Application architecture

* the server is now split into two roles, serving, and generation.
* the two roles are managed by `supervisor` which runs as `SOVEREIGN_USER`, defaulting to the current user
* when you invoke the `sovereign` command, it will create two sets of processes
    * `sovereign-worker`: configuration generation (rendering data into
      templates). Single-process.
    * `sovereign-web`: serving configuration (responding to clients with
      pre-rendered bytes). Scales to `SOVEREIGN_WORKERS`

### Web

* **BREAKING**: Removed `/admin` endpoints
* Fixed a bug that caused `/deepcheck` to not return 500 on errors
* Integrated `/healthcheck` with worker health.

### Worker

* Listens on `http://${SOVEREIGN_WORKER_HOST}:${SOVEREIGN_WORKER_PORT}`,
  default `127.0.0.1:9080`
* The web process will register discovery requests against the worker,
  where they will build up over time.
* The registered clients will be used to perform re-rendering of templates,
  when sources/context are updated.
* The cache is on disk by default, at `/var/run/sovereign_cache`,
  configurable via `SOVEREIGN_CACHE_PATH`
* Web procs that read from the cache will block by default, and wait `5.0`
  seconds before giving up. Configurable with `SOVEREIGN_CACHE_READ_TIMEOUT`.
  Even if they timeout, the request for that cache entry will still be
  processed in the background and will be available sometime later.
* **BREAKING**: The cache is keyed on the discovery request details. You can control how
  the key is generated by configuring your YAML config file with
  `caching_rules`. Each rule is a JMESPath into the discovery request.
  We recommend extending the default to your needs, which is:
    ```yaml
    caching_rules:
      # === Sovereign internal fields ===
      - template.version  # based on template source code
      - is_internal_request  # used for the interface
      - desired_controlplane  # host header received from the proxy
      - resource_type  # clusters/routes/listeners/etc
      - api_version  # V2/V3/etc
      - envoy_version  # Semantic version of Envoy
      # === Envoy fields from the real Discovery Request ===
      - resource_names
      - node.cluster
      - node.locality
    ```
* If you are using template_context within modifiers or unit tests, 
  you may need to add this to your `conftest.py`:
  ```python
  @pytest.fixture(scope="session", autouse=True)
  def poll_context():
      loop = asyncio.get_event_loop()
      loop.run_until_complete(template_context.run_once())
      yield
  ```

### Context

* The module that polls context items has been rewritten
* It uses a non-blocking task event loop to process context efficiently and on-schedule
* Each `Loadable` can now have its own retry policy and schedule.

    ```yaml
    template_context:
      refresh: true
      # These will be used as a default interval if none are specified below
      refresh_rate: 60
      refresh_cron: "*/2 * * * *"
      context:
        my_context_item_name:
          loader: https  # this is a new alias for protocol
          deserialize_with: json  # this is a new alias for serialization
          path: https://foobar.com/api/v2/data
          interval: 300
          retry_policy:
            num_retries: 2
            interval: 5 # wait time between between retries
    ```

### User-interface

* The dropdown to select service-cluster has been removed
* A text input has been added that allows filtering on any Node field.
  Examples are in the UI tooltip.
* Pagination has been added for the main resources. Virtual-Hosts (under
  Routes) do not have pagination as yet.
* Clicking on resources will now display a side-panel instead of taking you
  to a separate page.
* Large JSON will be chunked to prevent the browser from lagging or crashing.


0.32.5 12-08-2025
-----------------

* fix: handle new keyword args for datadog statsd method (stats module)

0.32.2 23-06-2025
-----------------

* chore: Update h11 version 0.14.0 -> 0.16.0
* chore: Update requests version 2.31.0 -> 2.32.4

0.32.1 03-06-2025
-----------------

* build: Set the minimum `datadog` version to 0.50.1

0.32.0 29-05-2025
-----------------

* chore: Tidied up caching code a bit
* feat: Added support for environment variables in cache key computation via `extra_keys.env_vars` configuration to `discovery_cache` config

0.31.0 15-04-2025
-----------------

* feat: Add support for setting metadata in admin xds dump
* chore: split conftest files into two, one top-level, one for unit tests
* chore: Connected local sovereign instance to mock data
* chore: Move docker files into containers directory
* chore: Added mock container for dynamic context/sources
* fix: Preserve traceback when exception occurs in loading xds templates
* vulnfix: Update gunicorn version 22.0.0 -> 23.0.0

0.30.0 07-01-2025
-----------------

* fix: virtual hosts were not filtering correctly  
* feat: virtual hosts are now displayed in a single panel that can be filtered by route configuration  
* bug: Fix logging context between requests  
* fix: removed `/dev/shm` as the default gunicorn worker tmp dir  
* chore: replaced black + pylint with ruff
* chore: formatted codebase
* chore: centralised json response class in one module

Deprecations:

The following will be removed in the next MAJOR release (1.0.0):

* **sources** are now deprecated in favor of template context, see: https://developer.atlassian.com/platform/sovereign/migration/sources/
* **modifiers** are now deprecated in favor of template context, see: https://developer.atlassian.com/platform/sovereign/migration/sources/?tabId=2&tab=modifiers#advanced-use-cases
* **node matching** is now deprecated in favor of template context, see: https://developer.atlassian.com/platform/sovereign/migration/node_matching/
* **automatic resource filtering** based on name is deprecated and will be removed, see: https://developer.atlassian.com/platform/sovereign/migration/resource_filtering/
* **automatic type urls** being added to resources is deprecated and will be removed, see: https://developer.atlassian.com/platform/sovereign/migration/type_urls/
* **v1 config** is deprecated and will be removed, see: https://developer.atlassian.com/platform/sovereign/migration/config/


0.29.4 22-10-2024
-----------------

* security: update dependencies
* fix: ui was expecting the wrong type for debug query parameter


0.29.3 11-10-2024
-----------------

* fix: routes not appearing in ui
* fix: removed if/else preventing single vhosts from rendering
* fix: virtual hosts in the ui will now be shown in a section under their route configs name
* chore: cleaned up usage of resource_names
* feat: show error if there are no resources
* feat: added option to show debug info in ui. Use query parameter ?debug=1 on any page to display the information.
* tests: added unit tests
* tests: added a usage of resource_names in routes template to test


0.29.2 04-10-2024
-----------------

* fix: openapi.json not rendering due to Resources object
* fix: pinned cryptography to 42.x.x due to compatibility problems in some downstream projects. Will revisit.


0.29.1 20-09-2024
-----------------

* CVE-2024-40647 - Update sentry-sdk


0.29.0 18-09-2024
-----------------

* vulnfix: update poetry lock
* feature: add a new configurable called `extra_keys` to the `discovery_cache` config which 
  allows service owners to specify extra keys to include in the cache key hash.
* ci: merges to master do not release to pypi. a git tag will need to be added
  to trigger a release.
* ci: loosened mypy strictness
* tracing: added work-in-progress zipkin module

#### config loader rework

* chore: migrated all existing config loaders to use custom loader protocol
* feature: added ability to define your own deserializer in the same way, for use with custom loaders.
* refactor: moved config_loaders module to dynamic_config subpackage


0.28.0 04-07-2024
-----------------

* ui: errors encountered while rendering resources in the interface will now be displayed in the list of resources
* refactored: fixed resource name type in discovery response

0.27.1 19-06-2024
-----------------

* tests: added additional unit tests for schema configuration

0.27.0 17-06-2024
-----------------

* Updated pydantic dependency to Pydantic V2

0.26.0 20-05-2024
-----------------

* feature: added ability to define your own custom config loaders, that can be used in template_context.

0.25.4 04-22-2024
-----------------
*  CVE-2024-1135 - Update gunicorn

0.25.3 01-04-2024
-----------------
* CVE-2023-50782 - Update cryptography

0.25.2 27-03-2024
-----------------
* feature: Allow specifying gunicorn `max_requests` and `max_requests_jitter`
  through environment variables `SOVEREIGN_MAX_REQUESTS` and
  `SOVEREIGN_MAX_REQUESTS_JITTER`

0.25.1 27-02-2024
-----------------

* Updated fastapi dependency to address Regular Expression Denial of Service (ReDoS) (CVE-2024-24762)
* Updated orjson dependency to address Relative Path Traversal (CVE-2024-27454)
* Fixed up types due to updated starlette

0.25.0 15-02-2024
-----------------

* feature: Added selectable encryption suite cipher AES256-GCM, falls back to Fernet if decryption is unsuccessful
  * crypto api endpoint will return the encryption type that was used
* refactor: Refactored code to support selectable encryption suites
* chore: bump pytest, tavern, mypy dependencies

0.24.6 02-02-2024
-----------------
* Support configuration of upstream endpoint HealthCheckConfig

0.24.5 17-10-2023
-----------------
* Updated dependencies to address cryptography CVE

0.24.4 17-10-2023
-----------------
* Upon context refresh, if a refresh fails but a value already exists, do not replace it

0.24.3 17-10-2023
-----------------

* if no modifiers are configured, they will not be executed

0.24.2 09-10-2023
-----------------

* Ensure redis-py version is not above 5.0.0, it contains a regression resulting in increased "ConnectionError: No connection available" errors

0.24.1 07-10-2023
-----------------

* Update dependencies

0.24.0 04-09-2023
-----------------

* feat: Context refreshes now have individual retries
  * defaults to `refresh_num_retries: 3` and `refresh_retry_interval_secs: 10`

0.23.0 03-09-2023
-----------------

* Reverted changes in 0.21 and 0.22

~~0.22.0 27-09-2023~~
-----------------

* ~~refactored template context:~~
    * ~~no longer hijacks crypto suite if it should be disabled - must be handled in template~~
    * ~~no longer removes unused variables from jinja templates~~
    * ~~passes node value directly to function instead of entire discovery req and template~~
* ~~removed "sovereign.runtime" feature~~

~~0.21.0 21-09-2023~~
-----------------

* ~~refactor: cleaning up the import path so that sovereign can be imported without side effects~~
* ~~refactor: reverted ProcessedTemplate class and use simple objects instead~~
* ~~feature: allow accessing template context without importing all of sovereign `from sovereign.runtime import template_context`~~

0.20.2 20-09-2023
-----------------

* Replace pkg_resources with importlib

0.20.1 07-08-2023
-----------------

* Update dependencies

0.20.0 21-07-2023
-----------------

* Create separate BoundLoggers for access and application logs
* Bump structlog to latest version
* Fixes applications logs not being emitted due to shared formatters with access logs
* Add 'type' field to output of logs
* Add custom formatter for application logs

0.19.3 20-07-2023
-----------------

Fixes to pipeline

* Serve http config locally
* Use docker compose v2 instead of v1
* Bump cryptography version to 41.0.2
* Update poetry lock

0.19.2 22-05-2023
-----------------

* Update dependencies

0.19.1 05-22-2023
-----------------

* Template context refresh stats are tagged with the relevant `context`

0.18.1 06-04-2023
-----------------

* Increase graceful_timeout above timeout
* Set worker_tmp_dir to /dev/shm per https://docs.gunicorn.org/en/stable/faq.html#how-do-i-avoid-gunicorn-excessively-blocking-in-os-fchmod and https://pythonspeed.com/articles/gunicorn-in-docker/ and https://github.com/benoitc/gunicorn/issues/1863

0.18.0 02-04-2023
-----------------

* Re-enable in-memory caching by default
* Move unit tests over to xDS API v3
* Remove tests for Envoy versions earlier then 1.18
* Update all python modules and libraries.
* Add `httptools` as optional extra, to improve uvicorn performance over default h11
* Set FastAPI default_response_class.
* Enable gunicorn preload_app by default to speed up app boot time


0.17.2 09-02-2023
-----------------

* Upgrading vulnerable cryptography version (>=39.0.1)

0.17.1 02-02-2023
-----------------

* feature: Support for dynamic environmental variables of host and port.

0.17.0 13-01-2022
-----------------

* feature: multiple fernet encryption keys can be specified in order to support rotation.

0.16.1 21-12-2022
-----------------

* Support discovery cache configuration
* Fix bug where cache would deliver an empty 404

0.16.0 20-12-2022
-----------------

* Support for redis caching of discovery templates.

0.15.0 09-12-2022
-----------------

* Support for Python 3.11
* Bumped dependencies

0.14.3 08-12-2022
-----------------

* Make error_details for xDS requests available to logging

0.14.2 14-11-2022
-----------------

* Upgrade cryptography to ^38.0.3 to fix CVE-2022-3602 and CVE-2022-3786.
* Revert 0.14.1 'Removed async from the discovery service endpoint' due to a regression in performance.

0.14.1 26-09-2022
-----------------

* Removed async from the discovery service endpoint so that it runs in a separate
  threadpool instead of running a coroutine (which didn't ever yield back to event loop)

0.14.0 14-07-2022
-----------------

* updated several library dependencies
* sovereign will attempt to log the leftmost address in the x-forwarded-for header
  as the source ip. Otherwise the source ip of the tcp connection will be used.

0.13.0 13-07-2022
-----------------

* perf: the cache strategy will now always be based on content, the configuration option
  will be removed at some point.
* perf: replace hashing function for determining `version_info` of configs
* perf: removed some questionable await calls that may add pauses in execution for no benefit
* feat: Added `/admin/templates` to display details about currently loaded templates
* bugfix: Fixed `/admin/xds_dump` not displaying any resources

0.12.2 06-07-2022
-----------------

* Bump ujson to ^5.4.0 to fix CVE-2022-31117

0.12.1 24-06-2022
-----------------

* Added v3 runtime resource to type urls
* Sovereign will ignore errors for missing type urls

0.12.0 16-06-2022
-----------------

### Features
* Frequency of context refreshes can be set using cron expressions


0.11.2 12-04-2022
-----------------

* other: Remove envoy-data-plane dependency

0.11.1 03-12-2021
-----------------

* other: updated uvloop dependency to 0.16.0

0.11.0 TBA
----------------
### Refactors
* sources are populated via a poller, no more passing around data in globals
* metrics, similar change to above
* logs, similar change to above
* crypto, similar change to above
* template context, similar change to above

### Features
* Sovereign will try to parse the config as v2 first, and fallback to v1
* the `module` config loader can now load functions instead of only entire modules/packages

### Performance
* Upon loading a template, the jinja variables will be parsed and cached once (reduces compute per request)
* the checksum of a template is used to calculate whether the envoy has uptodate configuration. This checksum is now cached.
* the source code of each template is now cached.

### Bugfixes
* the source file loader (for importing `python://` files) was overriding similarly named templates, across versions

### Breaking Changes
#### Imports
* `sovereign.context.template_context` has moved to `sovereign.template_context`
* `sovereign.utils.crypto` has moved to `sovereign.cipher_suite`


0.10.5 22-07-2021
-----------------

* Config: Allowed configuring more ASGI-server related options such as threads/timeout

0.10.4 08-06-2021
-----------------

* Bugfix: interface nav menu was populated with incorrectly named resources

0.10.3 04-06-2021
-----------------

* Bugfix: logging/metrics middleware causing exceptions due to being passed invalid
  parameters

0.10.2 02-06-2021
-----------------

* Bugfix: modifiers were not being loaded due bad evaluation of an type check

0.10.1 01-06-2021 - YANKED
--------------------------

* The entire codebase now has `mypy` static type checking applied
* Fixed some ASGI environment variables not being picked up
* Moved initial sources refresh to a function that is called by fastapi on startup

0.10.0 20-05-2021
----------------

#### Logging

* Added the ability to customize the log format, with a bunch of variables
  that can be used.

#### Configuration

* The previous config loaders format eg. `file+json:///etc/my_file.json` has
  been deprecated. Areas of configuration that use this format can now use
  a proper object, such as:

```yaml
protocol: file
serialization: json
path: /etc/my_file.json
```

* The main sovereign configuration has been restructured. Your old config
  should continue to work for the meantime.

#### Builtin Healthchecks

* `/deepcheck` has been changed *again*. It will attempt to render every
  configured healthcheck. It will not raise an exception, but it will print out
  the problems that occurred, in the http response.
* `/deepcheck` had a bug where it was rendering templates, but without any instances.

#### Misc

* Removed 'memoized templates' as they were unstable and I didn't have time to
  figure out why. Might look at better caching options in future.
* Some type annotations like Instances and Instance, which were really
  just builtin types, have been changed to builtin types.
* Bumped dependencies
* Project is now formatted using `black`
* Documentation is now versioned
* Bugfix: the `Node` model was setting metadata to `None` in the absence of a value.
  We need to set this to an empty dictionary so that the `.get()` method is available.

0.9.7 13-03-2021
----------------

* bugfix: incorrect link to stylesheet! Added a test for this.

0.9.6 12-03-2021
----------------

* interface: used a proper CSS framework for styling

0.9.5 05-02-2021
----------------

* caching: the behavior for caching responses AFTER serialization
  has occurred is being rolled back and set as beta. It can be
  enabled by setting metadata on envoy proxy nodes. The metadata
  to enable it is "enable_beta_caching", with any value.
* interface: the interface now uses the same discovery process
  as regular discovery requests. This means the interface should
  be a more realistic representation of what envoy proxies receive.
  It also means that there should be less breakages in the interface
  as changes are made.

0.9.4 04-02-2021
----------------

* bugfix: (revised from 0.9.2) cached responses were not taking into account host header differences, causing some envoy proxies to receive
  configuration with an unexpected cluster name. -- ordering was incorrect for the previous attempted fix.

0.9.3 04-02-2021
----------------

* bugfix: some extras went missing from the packaging metadata in the migration to poetry

0.9.2 02-02-2021
----------------

* bugfix: wrapped orjson dumps function would sometimes cause deepcheck to fail
  when attempting to serialize or decode an Undefined value
* bugfix: cached responses were not taking into account host header differences, causing some envoy proxies to receive
  configuration with an unexpected cluster name.
* ui: resources interface can make use of new caching to return bytes directly instead of serializing
* other: switched project from pip/setuptools to poetry, because a new version of pip was causing issues
* other: replaced dockerfile used for testing with a multi-stage-build
* other: deleted old sphinx code
* other: removed codeclimate coverage, will just use the coverage tool from now on
* other: combined unit/lint stages, removed pip cache stage. No point.

0.9.1 11-11-2020
----------------

* bugfix: circular imports could occur in modifiers, even if they contain minimal code

0.9.0 06-11-2020
----------------

* security: updated cryptography dependency to 3.2 [dc93136](https://bitbucket.org/atlassian/sovereign/commits/dc9313664c480fdcb0b51ffc2178f8c5a53e8c3f)
* performance: replaced some classes that weren't caching template content properly. [7da8aa2](https://bitbucket.org/atlassian/sovereign/commits/7da8aa2b7c3614444de08eb76f92f671aecd5acf)
* caching: responses are now cached earlier in the discovery process, which means
           that the serialized response can be saved and reused, which saves a good
           portion of CPU per request even on some HTTP 200 responses. [fd1a011](https://bitbucket.org/atlassian/sovereign/commits/fd1a0112ce497b0b2021359efd99a76621bd06da)

0.8.1 02-10-2020
----------------

* Handle `ScannerError` gracefully and send exception to sentry

0.8.0 22-09-2020
----------------

* Added envoy-data-plane as a dependency, which allows constructing and validating templates using envoy types
* /admin endpoints use regular JSON to dump responses for better compatibility
* Added a new endpoint /admin/debug_template to dump the raw representation of a processed template (before deserializing)
* ui: added a nice plain text response if no templates have been configured.
* refactored a few functions so that their purpose is more clear

0.7.4 30-07-2020
----------------

* bugfix: potential division by zero exception when calculating weighted cluster weights
* security: bumped uvicorn to 0.11.7

0.7.3 06-07-2020
----------------

* config: template versions can now be specified in short form i.e. `1.13` instead of `1.13.X`
* discovery: type urls will be automatically inserted for resources that don't have them.
* discovery: v2/v3 api is now supported automatically, and type urls inserted will contain the same version
             that was requested. This does not protect against bad syntax in the template.


0.7.2 29-04-2020
----------------

* Added configurable cache strategy for Sovereign 304 responses (when config hasn't changed).
  Sovereign can be configured to base the version of the configuration on the context (data used to create config)
  or the content (the config after being rendered using context).
* Removed context cache, since it didn't seem to be effective
* Templates will cache their jinja AST and source checksum for a slight performance improvement

0.7.1 17-04-2020
----------------

* bugfix: modifiers were applying to out-of-date instances

0.7.0 16-04-2020 -- Deleted from PyPI
-------------------------------------

* Sovereign requires **Python>3.8.0** as of this version

* sources: New argument for sources: `scope`

   This allows adding a source that will be 'scoped' to a single discovery type.
   For example, if a source only contains data for clusters, or routes, the scope can be set to `clusters` or `routes`.
   That data will then be available in templates in a variable named after the resource type eg. `clusters`.
   To have a source be available in all templates, leave the scope blank or put `default` and it will be available
   via the variable `instances` to maintain backward compatibility.

* internal: replace custom cached properties with functools.cached_property
* logging: YAML parsing errors will now emit a log message
* logging: Added some log messages to indicate that Sovereign has started
* bugfix: if node matching was disabled, the web interface would break when trying to determine service clusters
* config: if no config file is specified via SOVEREIGN_CONFIG, Sovereign will look for a file at /etc/sovereign.yaml
* caching: [template context](https://vsyrakis.bitbucket.io/sovereign/docs/html/guides/tutorial.html#adding-template-context)
           (including the global `instances` variable available in templates)
           is now cacheable using the config option `context_cache_size`
           or environment variable `SOVEREIGN_CONTEXT_CACHE_SIZE`.
           Default is 1000;
           this means 1000 different combinations of requests (node + xds type + resource names + sources).
           This uses a LRU cache, so the option caches a number of executions rather than
           for a specific amount of time.
           A new metric is emitted for this: `sovereign.discovery.context.bytes`

0.6.17 2020-03-24
-----------------

* bugfix: removed max_age from ui cookies since it caused them to stop working somehow

0.6.16 2020-03-12
-----------------

* discovery: the host header provided to sovereign is now available as 'host_header' in templates

0.6.15 2020-03-04
-----------------

* serialization: added support for ORJSON; install bundled with `pip install sovereign[orjson]`

0.6.14 2020-02-26
-----------------

* bugfix: sometimes during discovery, there would be no resources rendered, resulting in a runtime error
* ui: added a max-age to cookies set in the ui
* metrics: added timing for authentication
* performance: reading from sources is now cached in-between refreshes
* performance: glom is only used to perform node-matching if the keys involved are complex/nested
* performance: utils.eds.locality_lb_endpoints was performing a deepcopy unnecessarily in cases where there is only a single endpoint
* performance: node-matching conditions is now supplied by a generator which means it exits as soon as one condition evaluates as true
* performance: templates loaded by sovereign at startup will store their code/template/content upon being initially loaded
* cache: removed threshold limit of 10 items, which means it is now the default (500 items)

0.6.13 2020-02-18
-----------------

* bugfix: node matching would still be evaluated even if it was disabled. aka sovereign would still check for the default source key "service_clusters".
* discovery: sovereign will check if the envoy proxy has supplied its build version in the envoy v3 api format

0.6.12 2020-02-06
-----------------

* bugfix: ImportError when no auth/crypto key is provided and the default is used (empty string)

0.6.11 2020-01-21
-----------------

* perf: added a 60 second cache to modifiers, as they are typically injected as an entry point at install-time, therefore
        should execute the same way almost all the time.
* stats: added an object that fixes the /stats endpoint not displaying emitted stats when statsd is enabled
* swagger doc: updated descriptions of a few endpoints
* removed /request_id debugging endpoint

0.6.10 2020-01-17
-----------------

* bugfix: not supplying a fernet key would result in an exception, even if auth/crypto is not used
* improvement: loading environment variables will now produce a better error when they are missing/can't be loaded

0.6.9 2020-01-16
----------------

* bugfix: changes made to source refreshing may have resulted in sovereign only refreshing them once upon startup.
          Added more metrics, and sovereign will force a refresh of sources if they become stale.
          In addition, instead of having a separate thread to poll sources, it is now a middleware, as the thread proved
          unreliable.

0.6.8 2020-01-15
----------------

* sentry: removed sentry-asgi dependency as the sentry-sdk now supports starlette
* ui: fixed the virtualhosts list only sorting the first item
* sources: made the thread that polls sources more resilient by continuing after any sort of failure... might add
           some logic that kills the server in the event of catastrophic failure.

0.6.7 2020-01-14
----------------

* logs: the setting debug_enabled/SOVEREIGN_DEBUG will now enable/disable debug log messages.
* sources: sources are now polled continuously in the background in a single thread instead of a thread being created
           after each discovery response.

0.6.6 2019-12-19
----------------

* bugfix: the version of supplied xds resource configuration is now also based on the name of the requested resources

0.6.5 2019-12-18
----------------

* server script: removed bash script in favor of a python script
* server script: number of workers/threads can now be overridden with environment variables
* sources: changed sovereign to stop attempting to refresh sources if an error is encountered, + log a message/metric for this
* sources: removed metrics for swap_time and poll_time
* updated docs

0.6.4 2019-12-12
----------------

* middleware: metrics middleware will not add certain tags if they are empty. This mainly affects requests that resulted in a HTTP 500.

0.6.3 2019-12-09
----------------

* middleware: fixed metrics not being added to the application
* amended tests to make sure metrics are being incremented
* added route `/admin/stats` for seeing which stats have been incremented and how many times


0.6.2 2019-12-09
----------------

* middleware: separated logging/metrics middleware into two separate middlewares
* middleware: made metrics middleware ignore failures and log an error instead

0.6.1 2019-12-06
----------------

* discovery: fixed a bug where proprietary headers were not being included in discovery responses, leading to metrics being missed

0.6.0 2019-12-05
----------------

* ui: the routes page won't display virtualhosts if they are the only virtualhost within a route configuration
* ui: fixed a minor issue in top nav where selecting routes would highlight both routes and scoped-routes
* ui: made discovery responses used to generate ui a tiny bit more efficient
* assets: updated screenshot of the ui
* discovery: stop sending body with 304 response status (against HTTP RFC)
* discovery: cached responses now only emit 304 (config option removed)
* discovery: removed client_ip tag from discovery.rq_total metric
* openapi: added model to discovery route so that there is an example in /docs

#### Reworked metrics

Since metrics for HTTP requests were only being emitted for discovery endpoints, and various other metrics that
were introduced prior to performance improvements in sovereign, the following changes were made:

* Replaced `rq_ms` metric with `discovery.rq_ms`
* Removed:
    * `discovery.total_ms`
    * `discovery.version_hash_ms`
    * `discovery.render_ms`
    * `discovery.deserialize_ms`
* Removed the `resource` tag from `discovery.rq_ms` & `discovery.rq_total`
* Sovereign will include several headers on discovery responses:
    * `X-Sovereign-Client-Version`: The build version of the envoy proxy as indicated by the discovery request
    * `X-Sovereign-Requested-Resources`: The resource names that the envoy proxy requested
    * `X-Sovereign-Requested-Type`: The type of discovery that was requested (clusters/listeners/etc)
    * `X-Sovereign-Response-Version`: The version_info of the resulting configuration
* The above headers are used by middleware to tag the metrics: `discovery.rq_ms` & `discovery.rq_total`


0.5.13 2019-11-29
-----------------

* discovery: derive "discovery_types" enum from all configured discovery types, across all envoy versions
* ui: added a count for all resource types
* ui: added support for selecting which envoy version templates should be rendered as
* ui: added support for filtering resources by service cluster/source match key
* ui: '/' now redirects to the UI instead of docs
* ui: Handle case where a version/service-cluster combination results in an error


0.5.12 2019-11-14
-----------------

* routes: fixed `/admin/xds_dump` emitting an error when it encountered an object that it doesn't know how to serialize to json

0.5.11 2019-11-01
-----------------

* routes: removed `/admin/cache_dump` since it's been mostly rendered useless by smarter source polling
* config: added an option "enable_access_logs" to toggle whether or not to emit logs for http requests


0.5.10 2019-10-10
-----------------

* init: removed startup log message
* init: refactored module to be a lot simpler, also changed it so that sovereign will crash if not provided configuration
* logging: switched to using thread-local for structlog, which allows adding context to log messages from other parts of the app
* logging: added back resource_names/envoy_ver to discovery request logs, since this was removed when fastapi was introduced
* repo: added a screenshot of the ui to the readme
* schemas: added a `common` property to the `Node` pydantic model that returns fields that are typically not unique from node to node
* schemas: added `xds_templates` property to the `SovereignConfig` model, to simplify the init process
* discovery: removed debug keyword argument from discovery.response; this is now controlled by `debug_enabled` in configuration
* discovery: the `debug` variable will no longer appear in template context
* discovery: moved most of the code related to building template context to the `make_context()` function
* discovery: simplified the values passed in to `parse_envoy_configuration()`, this may prove useful later if we decide to apply caching to this function
* discovery: added the basis for unit tests which will be useful for benchmarking later on
* discovery/templates: added the ability to specify python templates, which avoids the cost of having to use jinja template rendering + deserialization.
  See [Adding Python templates](https://vsyrakis.bitbucket.io/sovereign/docs/html/guides/tutorial.html#python-templates) in the tutorial for more details.
* config_loaders: added python loader for the above change. Probably not usable for anything else but templates at the moment.
* tests: added starlette test client to perform unit tests which execute fastapi routing code and provide accurate coverage
* tests: added semi-benchmarking unit tests for discovery, particularly for the use-case where an envoy has 10,000 clusters

0.5.9 2019-09-25
----------------

* Forgot to add ``aiofiles`` to dependecies... which is needed to serve CSS for the UI. :disappointed:

0.5.8 2019-09-25
----------------

* Added gunicorn, which will run sovereign with the uvicorn worker class
* Bugfix: logging - Fixed ``uri_path`` including the scheme/host
* Upgraded resource user interface CSS, looks fancy now

0.5.7 2019-09-24
----------------

* DNS failures during ``sovereign.utils.eds:locality_lb_endpoints`` will now only raise if dns_hard_fail is set to True in configuration
* Refactored ``sovereign.discovery`` so that parsing the rendered YAML happens as a second step, in a way that does not modify the original list of resources.
* Added tests to ensure above change is consistent
* Added a way to safely represent the current configuration, and then added an endpoint that displays it
* Configurations that enable statsd but haven't installed it will result in an error

0.5.6 2019-09-24
----------------

* Changed dns utility to raise a HTTP Exception with the details instead of a Lookup error that would result in a traceback

0.5.5 2019-09-24
----------------

* Bugfix: PyYAML requirement has to be installed from PyPI

0.5.4 2019-09-23
----------------

* Bugfix: request duration metric was being reported inaccurately due to being provided in seconds, but measured in milliseconds
* Added a custom list type which automatically handles resource names requested by envoy proxies.
  This means that a template can declare resources, without having to use `if` conditionals
  to return specifically what a proxy has requested. If the envoy proxy does not specify any resource names, Sovereign will return
  all resources from the template.
* The above change also fixes some issues with the resource UI
* Made the installation of ujson and statsd optional. Install with (Example: `pip install sovereign[ujson,statsd]`)

0.5.3 2019-09-20
----------------

* Replaced all instances of dataclasses with pydantic models
* Added a *really* basic UI that can be used to browse the current XDS config of the server.
  Will iterate on this in future releases.

0.5.2 2019-09-19
----------------

* ``/admin/source_dump`` uses a JSON encoder that supports complex python types, in the case that a Modifier inserts them.

0.5.1 2019-09-19
----------------

* Added UJSON serializer as an option when loading config and sources
* Added an optional boto dependency that can be used to load S3 buckets with paths such as ``s3+ujson://my-bucket-name/file.json``.
  You can get sovereign bundled with boto with ``pip install sovereign[boto]``

0.5.0 2019-09-19
----------------

* Migrated from Quart (and Hypercorn) to FastAPI (Starlette/Uvicorn).
    * Sovereign now has a ``/docs`` endpoint which should be helpful!
    * Better request/response validation
    * Clearer data schemas for all endpoints
    * More maintainable codebase into the future
    * Cleaner middleware system
    * Some performance improvements in serialization

0.4.2 2019-09-13
----------------

* Bugfix weighted_clusters utility not actually normalizing the weights up to a default total weight of 100
* Bugfix template_context refresh schedule did not have a unit (changed to 'seconds')

0.4.1 2019-09-11
----------------

* Fixed UUID being an object instead of a string when logged
* Pinned h11 back to 0.7

0.4.0 2019-09-11
----------------

* Bumped versions of some pinned dependencies (quart, hypercorn, h11)
* Changed some exceptions with regard to cryptographic operations, they now typically return either HTTP 400 or 401
* Replaced werkzeug exceptions with Quart exceptions
* Added simple request-id to every request
* Removed flask-request-id dependency
* Removed flask patch
* Added code that checks templates and removes variables from template context if they are not declared/used within the template.
  This means that if context that's not relevant to the template changes, it won't affect the version of the configuration.

0.3.3 2019-09-10
----------------

* Changed config file loading to use dictupdate utility to merge multiple config files, overwriting values with the rightmost config file
* Added the ability to configure whether or not **template context** is periodically reloaded.

0.3.2 2019-09-06
----------------

* Bugfix: HTTP config loader was deserializing the text of a request even for 5xx responses. Now raises.

0.3.1 2019-09-05
---------------

* Bugfix: when matching nodes to sources, the original source data could sometimes be transformed in-place by custom
  modifiers and/or global modifiers. This would not result in a change in configuration, but the version_info string
  would be slightly different, causing a 200 and full response to be returned to envoy clients, instead of a 304 Not Modified.

0.3.0 2019-09-03
----------------

* Overrided the default Quart JSON encoder with one that catches type errors for unknown objects.
* Added the schedule library to poll sources on a configurable interval.
  Sources are now refreshed during the teardown of a request, and only when pending according to the schedule.
  This will remove cases where a cache miss causes a request to have to wait for sovereign to
  refresh the source before serving out the response.
* Renamed some functions in the sources module so they make more sense.
* Added glom for source/node matching so that either matching key can be specified as 'key.nested_key.second_nested_key'
* Removed the "service broker" source since the file source supersedes it
* Added more validation to configuration options and types by switching to pydantic dataclasses
* Added configuration options that allow specification of a source_match_key and node_match_key
  These options will look for a key within all instances polled from sources, and then look for the corresponding key
  in the "Node" of an Envoy Discovery Request. If both values match, or the source contains the value from the node,
  then the instance will be added to template context for rendering.
* Reworked tests to more explicitly test the interaction between source_match_key and node_match_key
* Added a bunch of unit tests


0.2.5 2019-08-28
----------------

* Added bytes_in/bytes_out to logging based on the content-length of the request/response respectively.
* Removed the envoy node id and metadata from the arguments used to create the version_info of configuration so that
  all nodes within a (cluster, build_version) grouping would receive consistent versions.

0.2.4 2019-08-27
----------------

* Pinned hypercorn (ASGI server) version to 0.7.2

0.2.3 2019-08-27
----------------

* Moved authentication to ``sovereign.views.discovery.discovery_endpoint`` from ``sovereign.discovery``.
  This is to fix the ``/admin/xds_dump`` endpoint from requiring auth.
* Added a bit more detail (what XDS type, what envoy version) for errors produced when a template fails
  to be parsed as valid YAML.
* Bugfix ``/admin/xds_dump`` view not awaiting discovery response coroutine
* Updated mock_discovery request to return the DiscoveryRequest dataclass instead of dictionary
* Added crypto utils to template context by default
* Made ``/admin/xds_dump`` slightly safer by introducing metadata in the mock discovery request which
  signals sovereign to hide private keys, which sovereign does by swapping the crypto utilities with a dummy one.

0.2.2 2019-08-23
----------------

* Fixed a bug that would cause statsd tags to be parsed as simple strings instead of using a config loader to evaluate them.
* Made discovery requests not require a locality
* Made discovery requests return 'default' when the build version string cannot be parsed
* Fixed template_context being a required configuration option
* Fixed auth always being enabled

0.2.1 2019-08-23
----------------

* Removed authentication working by providing simply a string that is decryptable,
  without caring what the content of the string is

0.2.0 2019-08-22
----------------

* Introduced a few dataclasses to structure and validate the configuration options that sovereign has available.
* Added the ability to configure a list of strings that are valid auth secrets.
  When auth is enabled, envoys must provide auth that when decrypted, matches at least one of these strings.
  Envoy proxies can provide these via their node metadata.
* Related to the above point, deprecated authentication working by providing simply a string that is decryptable,
  without caring what the content of the string is.
* Expanded the available configuration options and associated documentation.
* Added dataclasses for discovery requests

0.1.30 2019-08-18
-----------------

* utils.eds.locality_lb_endpoints: Skip zone-aware load-balancing for upstreams with a single zone
* Bugfix: /admin/xds_dump endpoint was returning no resources due to the mock discovery request having a version of '0',
  which indicated to sovereign that it should return early with No Change.

0.1.29 2019-08-16
-----------------

* Bugfix: Since switching version_hash to use the data from pre-jinja-rendering & YAML serialization, it has been hashing based on data which
  may not be the same from machine to machine. Templates loaded using Jinja2 in particular (which is the suggested way of configuring sovereign)
  had a string representation that was simply the memory address of the template. This is different from machine to machine, so the version_info
  that was generated as a result and handed to Envoy proxies was different depending on which server responded to it.
* Templates loaded via config will also store a checksum if possible, to aid with the above point.
* Also switched the hashing algo to zlib.adler32 since this is deterministic, high performance, and we don't need the security of an md5 hash or similar for versioning.
* Enabled async for jinja2 rendering

0.1.28 2019-08-16
-----------------

* Added /version endpoint to determine what version of sovereign is running

0.1.27 2019-08-16
-----------------

* Bugfix: version_hash was non-deterministic resulting in different version info strings per control-plane (different hashing seed)

0.1.26 2019-08-15
-----------------

* Bugfix: version_hash producing different versions on each execution due to receiving differently ordered Discovery Requests.

0.1.25 2019-08-15
-----------------

* The function that calculates the version number for configuration has been changed to use python's in-built ``hash()`` function.
  The previous implementation (taking a sha256 hash of the YAML serialized config) was too expensive and the level of security provided by
  such a hashing function is not required here.
* The version hash is now based on the (template content + template context + envoy node data) whereas before it was based on
  the configuration AFTER it has been rendered together. This allows Sovereign to return a non-200 earlier.
* Added a jitter argument to the memoize decorator to allow randomizing the cache timeout.
* Added 'cache_timeout' and 'cache_jitter' as config options to the file Source.

0.1.24 2019-08-15
-----------------

* Added more statsd metrics to measure the complete time to discovery including serialization and version hashing

0.1.23 2019-06-24
-----------------

* Bugfix: Sentry Flask integration replaced with sentry-asgi

0.1.22 2019-06-19
-----------------

* Bugfix: `/admin/xds_dump` endpoint was casting the query parameter `resource_names` as a string, when it should be a list
* Bugfix: quart.flask_patch needs to be imported before the Sentry Flask integration

0.1.21 2019-06-05
-----------------

* Changed /healthcheck endpoint to no longer test rendering, and instead just return OK. Rendering test moved to /deepcheck
* Added ability to specify an optional Sentry DSN to send exceptions to. Environment variable for this is `SOVEREIGN_SENTRY_DSN`.
  Sovereign must be installed with `pip install sovereign[sentry]` to install the required packages.

0.1.20 2019-05-27
-----------------

* Changed /healthcheck endpoint to test rendering a random template type, instead of all of them, per execution

0.1.19 2019-05-23
-----------------

* Bugfix: if sources retrieved by sovereign aren't loadable as a dict, they will be skipped and a warning will be logged

0.1.18 2019-03-29
-----------------

* Add configuration options to specify port and constant tags for Statsd metrics

0.1.17 2019-03-22
-----------------

* Bugfix: an envoy without an ipv4 key in metadata would receive errors in response to a discovery request
* Return a customizable HTTP response code on 'cached' responses (i.e. responses with no changes)
  The default is 304, which at present causes Envoy to consider the request failed. Setting this to 504 will avoid
  emitting logs and metrics that indicate a failure, but will increase the 5xx statistics of the cluster.
  The option can be set in the config via `no_changes_response_code`
* werkzeug.contrib.cache has been deprecated in favor of cachelib, so we are now using the latter.

0.1.16 2019-02-19
-----------------

* Restructured the package init so that it doesn't throw an exception if config hasn't been supplied via environment variable
* The app will only emit metrics for request paths that are used for discovery

0.1.15 2019-01-25
-----------------

* Removed and simplified the repository by removing Atlassian specific items
* Updated documentation and associated release process

0.1.14 2019-01-25
-----------------
* Changes to an Atlassian-related Modifier. Going to try to remove this at some stage.
